> What data types do each of these values represent?

"A Clockwork Orange" - **string**

42 - **integer**

09/02/1945 - **date**

98.7 - **float**

$15.99 - **float**

> Explain when a database would be used. Explain when a text file would be used.

Databases are preferred over text files because multiple users can make changes to them at the same time and that data will persist. Text files tend to lock multiple users out so they cannot be used by several people at once. In addition, databases are specifically laid out to make finding and manipulating data painless.

Databases are not human-readable, so any time you need the data to be readable by humans and computers, a text file would be the fit.

> Describe one difference between SQL and other programming languages.

SQL is a declarative language.You just tell it what to do and it does it. The user does not need to create an algorithm to make it work or decide the manner in which the data is retrieved.

> In your own words, explain how the pieces of a database system fit together at a high level.

Data is contained within the cells of a table. The type of data contained is dictated by the column, which also dictates the datatype. The certain instance of the data is dictated by the row. The intersection of the column and row contain a value, which is the data.

> Explain the meaning of table, row, column, and value.

A **table** is a collection of columns and rows that hold data pertaining to a certain thing.

A **column** describes what data is held in the cells directly beneath it.

A **row** describes a single instance of that data.

Lastly, the **value** is the data within the cell. 

> List three data types that can be used in a table.

_Date_, _Float_, _Integer_.

> Given this payments table, provide an English description of the following queries and include their results:

1) Retrieve all dates and amounts from the **date** and **amount** columns within the **payments** table

2) Retrieve all amounts in the **amount** column from the **payments** table that are over **500**.

3) Retrieve all instances in the **payments** table in which the **payee** was **"Mega Foods"**.

> Given this users table, write SQL queries using the following criteria and include the output:

1) The email and sign-up date for the user named DeAndre Data.

```
SELECT email, signup
FROM users
WHERE name = 'DeAndre Data';
```

2) The user ID for the user with email 'aleesia.algorithm@uw.edu'.

```
SELECT userid
FROM users
WHERE email = 'aleesia.algorithm@uw.edu';
```

3)All the columns for the user ID equal to 4.

```
SELECT *
FROM users
WHERE userid = 4;
```