> List the commands for adding, updating, and deleting data.

**ADD** - INSERT INTO adds data.

**UPDATE** - UPDATE will change data. ALTER will change the table itself.

**DELETE** - DELETE will delete data. DROP COLUMN will drop an entire column from a table. DROP TABLE will drop an entire table. 


> Explain the structure for each type of command.

** CREATE TABLE:**

```
CREATE TABLE table_name (
    column1 datatype
    column2 datatype
    column3 datatype
);
```

**INSERT INTO:**
```
INSERT INTO table_name
VALUES (column1_data, column2_data, column3_data);
```

_NOTE: When using this method, data must be inserted in the same order as the columns. If not, you will get an error or inaccurate data._


**UPDATE:**
```
UPDATE table_name SET column_name=updated_value WHERE id=12;
```

_NOTE: After the WHERE statement, an x-axis stipulation is needed to pinpoint the correct cell, otherwise the entire column will update._


**DELETE:**
```
DELETE FROM table_name WHERE id=12;
```

_NOTE: The above will delete any row with an id of 12._


**ALTER TABLE**
```
ALTER TABLE table_name ADD COLUMN color text;
```

_NOTE: ALTER TABLE requires the table name and a command, such as DROP COLUMN or ADD COLUMN. The above example adds a new column titled 'Color' and requires textual data._


**DROP TABLE**
```
DROP TABLE table_name;
```


> What are some of the data types that can be used in tables? Give a real-world example of each type.

SQL allows for 40 different datatypes. 

**bool** is for booleans and can be either true or false. For instance, "Has FitBit User reached steps goal today? True/False"

**integer** is for a whole number. For instance, "FitBit user has burned 1,952 calories today."

**date** shows the date. "Fitbit User last exercised on 05/13/2019.

**numeric** shows decimals but can limit the decimals. "Fitbit User is averaging 2,432.52 calories burned for the month of May.

**json** shows a JSON data object. Could be used to retrieve a FitBut user's overall stats for the day - calories burned, steps taken, calories taken in, date, minutes exercised, etc.


> Decide how to create a new table to hold a list of people invited to a wedding dinner. The table needs to have first and last names, whether they sent in their RSVP, the number of guests they are bringing, and the number of meals (1 for adults and 1/2 for children).


_Steps to create database, run files on it, and move into database_

- Create database: createdb -U postgres -w wedding

- Run files on database: psql -f ./fundamental-sql-commands.sql wedding postgres

- Move into database: psql wedding postgres


_Write a command that creates the table to track the wedding dinner._

```
CREATE TABLE wedding_guests(
	first_name text,
	last_name text,
	RSVP_sent bool,
	num_guests integer,
	num_meals integer
	
);
```

_Write a command that adds a column to track whether the guest sent a thank you card._

```
ALTER TABLE wedding_guests ADD COLUMN thank_you_sent text;
```

_You have decided to move the data about the meals to another table, so write a command to remove the column storing the number meals from the wedding table._

```
ALTER TABLE wedding_guests DROP COLUMN num_meals;
```

_The guests will need a place to sit at the reception, so write a command that adds a column for table number._

```
ALTER TABLE wedding_guests ADD COLUMN table_number integer;
```

_The wedding is over and we do not need to keep this information, so write a command that deletes the table numbers from the database._

```
DROP TABLE wedding_guests;
```

> Write a command to create a new table to hold the books in a library with the columns ISBN, title, author, genre, publishing date, number of copies, and available copies.

```
CREATE TABLE library_books(
	isbn text,
	title char(30),
	author text,
	genre text,
	publish_date date,
	num_copies integer,
	available_copies integer	
);
```

_Steps to create database, run files on it, and move into database_

- Create database: createdb -U postgres -w library

- Run files on database: psql -f ./05-library.sql library postgres

- Move into database: psql library postgres

_Find three books and add their information to the table._

```
INSERT INTO library_books VALUES ( 
9780802130204, 
'A Confederacy of Dunces', 
'John Kennedy Toole',
'Fiction',
'1980-04-11',
3,
2);

INSERT INTO library_books VALUES (
9780679781493,
'Less Than Zero',
'Brett Easton Ellis',
'Fiction',
'1985-11-15',
2,
2);

INSERT INTO library_books VALUES (
9780375725609,
'The Devil in the White City',
'Erik Larson',
'History',
'2003-09-22',
2,
1);
```

_Someone has just checked out one of the books. Change the number of available copies to 1 fewer._

'''
UPDATE library_books SET available_copies = available_copies - 1 WHERE isbn='9780802130204';
'''

NOTE: Chose to remove by ISBN because it is a certain version of a book being checked out. If the library has 2 hardcover versions and 2 paperback versions and a paperback is checked out, only the paperback ISBN needs to be decremented.

_Now one of the books has been added to the banned books list. Remove it from the table._

```
DELETE FROM library_books WHERE title='Less Than Zero' AND author='Brett Easton Ellis';
```
NOTE: Removed by title and author because if a book is banned, all versions of that book will be taken off the shelves. Doing it by title + author rather than ISBN ensures all versions are taken off the shelves.

Chose to go by title AND author to ensure no other books entitled Less Than Zero that are not the same book, just happen to share the same title, are penalized.

-- STEPS TO CREATE DATABASE, RUN FILES ON IT, AND MOVE INTO DATABASE
-- 0. Create database: createdb -U postgres -w spacecrafts
-- 1. psql -f ./06-spacecrafts.sql library postgres
-- 2. psql spacecrafts postgres

_Write a command to make a new table to hold spacecrafts. Information should include id, name, year launched, country of origin, a brief description of the mission, orbiting body, if it is currently operating, and its approximate miles from Earth. _

CREATE TABLE spacecrafts (
	id integer,
	name text,
	year_launched integer,
	origin_country text,
	description text,
	orbiting_body text,
	currently_operating boolean,
	miles_from_Earth integer
);

_Add three non-Earth-orbiting satellites to the table._

```
INSERT INTO spacecrafts (id, name, year_launched, origin_country, description, orbiting_body, currently_operating, miles_from_Earth)
VALUES 
(1, 'MAVEN', 2013, 'United States', 'Find how Mars lost its water and atmosphere', 'Mars', false, 250000000),
(2, 'THEMIS', 2007, 'United States', 'Study energy releases from Earth''s magnetosphere', 'Earth''s Moon', true, 238900),
(3, 'Sakigake', 1985, 'Japan', 'Observe space plasma and magnetic field in interplanetary space', 'Sun', false, 4340000);
```

_Remove one of the satellites from the table since it has just crashed into the planet._

```
DELETE FROM spacecrafts WHERE id=1;
```

_Edit another satellite because it is no longer operating and change the value to reflect that._

```
UPDATE spacecrafts SET currently_operating=false WHERE id=2; 
```