> How do you find related data held in two separate data tables?

A **JOIN** statement, which creates a new table with all of the information from the two separate data tables.

> Explain, in your own words, the difference between an INNER JOIN, LEFT OUTER JOIN, and RIGHT OUTER JOIN. Give a real-world example for each.

In a National Basketball Association (NBA) database, you could have a _Teams_ table (table 1) and a _Players_ table (table 2).

An **INNER JOIN** finds common elements between two tables. This would show every team that currently has players and every player who currently belongs to a team.

A **LEFT OUTER JOIN** contains every element in the first table and any common elements in the second. This would show every team in the NBA, whether or not they currently have players. So this search would show NBA teams that no longer exist (Vancouver Grizzlies, Seattle Supersonics) and expansion teams that will soon exist (Say... the St. Louis Archs or the Las Vegas Gamblers) even though they have no players.

A **RIGHT OUTER JOIN** contains every element in the second table and any common elements in the first. The opposite of the left outer join, this would show all basketball players regardless of if they have a team (say, they are coming out of colelge and have not been drafted by a team yet, or their contract just ended with one team and they are free agents).

> Define primary key and foreign key. Give a real-world example for each.

Every table has a **Primary Key**. It is a special column that _uniquely_ identifies a row. An example would be a Social Security number. If someone had the same Social Security as me, that'd be bad news for one of us.

A **Foreign Key** is a key in a table that links to a Primary Key in another table. In a database of Americans, a person is going to live in a state/province. Rather than writing New Hampshire or Puerto Rico, they could have a number as a foreign key (13, 52) which would link to a State/Province table in which New Hampshire had an id of 13 and Puerto Rico had an id of 52.

> Define aliasing. 

**Aliasing** is a way of shortening code if the same table is mentioned a several times. A _Person_ table could be shortened to _p_ and an _Address_ table could be shortened to _a_ by writing:

> Change this query so that you are using aliasing:

```
SELECT professor.name, compensation.salary,
compensation.vacation_days FROM professor JOIN
compensation ON professor.id =
compensation.professor_id;
```

would be...

```
SELECT p.name, c.salary, c.vacation_days
FROM professor AS p
JOIN compensation AS c
ON p.id = c.professor_id;
```

> Why would you use a NATURAL JOIN? Give a real-world example.

It is a shorthand alternative to utilizing the **USING** keyword. WIth _USING_, you must specify which columns are shared in between two tables, whereas **NATURAL JOIN** does this implicitly.

> Using this Employee schema and data, write queries to find the following information:

-- List all employees and all shifts.

```
SELECT e.name, s.date, s.start_time, s.end_time 
FROM scheduled_shifts AS ss 
JOIN employees AS e ON e.id = ss.employee_id 
JOIN shifts AS s ON ss.shift_id = s.id;
```

> Using this Adoption schema and data, please write queries to retrieve the following information and include the results:

-- Create a list of all volunteers. If the volunteer is fostering a dog, include each dog as well.

```
SELECT v.first_name, v.last_name, d.name
FROM volunteers AS v
LEFT OUTER JOIN dogs AS d 
ON v.foster_dog_id = d.id;
```

-- The cat's name, adopter's name, and adopted date for each cat adopted within the past month to be displayed as part of the "Happy Tail" social media promotion which posts recent successful adoptions.

```
SELECT c.name, a.first_name, a.last_name, ca.date
FROM adopters as a 
JOIN cat_adoptions as ca 
ON ca.adopter_id = a.id
JOIN cats as c 
ON c.id = ca.cat_id
WHERE ca.date >= current_date - 31;
```

-- Create a list of adopters who have not yet chosen a dog to adopt.

```
SELECT a.first_name, a.last_name
FROM adopters AS a 
JOIN dog_adoptions AS da
ON da.adopter_id != a.id;
```

-- Lists of all cats and all dogs who have not been adopted.

```
SELECT c.name
FROM cats as c
LEFT OUTER JOIN cat_adoptions AS ca
ON c.id = ca.cat_id
WHERE ca.adopter_id IS NULL;

SELECT d.name
FROM dogs as d
LEFT OUTER JOIN dog_adoptions as da
on d.id = da.dog_id
WHERE da.adopter_id IS null;
```

-- The name of the person who adopted Rosco.

```
SELECT a.first_name, a.last_name
FROM adopters AS a
JOIN dog_adoptions AS da
ON da.adopter_id = a.id;
```

>Using this Library schema and data, write queries applying the following scenarios and include the results:

-- To determine if the library should buy more copies of a given book, please provide the names and position, in order, of all of the patrons with a hold (request for a book with all copies checked out) on "Advanced Potion-Making".

```
SELECT p.name, h.rank
FROM patrons AS p
JOIN holds AS h
ON p.id = h.patron_id
JOIN books AS b
ON b.isbn = h.isbn
WHERE b.title = 'Advanced Potion-Making'
ORDER BY h.rank ASC;
```

-- List all of the library patrons. If they have one or more books checked out, list the books with the patrons.

```
SELECT p.name, b.title, t.checked_out_date, t.checked_in_date
FROM transactions AS t
JOIN patrons as p
ON t.id = p.id
JOIN books AS b
ON b.isbn = t.isbn;
```